journal.markdown, before:

# ARMSIM Project Journal
  by Luke Seelenbinder

## Preparation (Total time: 2 hours)
1. Investigate GO as a possibility for the project. (Time: 2 hours)

## Bootstrapping Code (Total time: 0.75 hours)
1. Implement main() and command line flag parsing. (Time: 0.75 hours)
  - This was easily accomplished via the built in Go tools (see references). I
    spent most of my time learning Go conventions and fighting with the little
    things that vary from language to language.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/log/]()
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/flag/]()

## Loader (Total time: 9.5 hours)
1. Setup package structure (Time: 0.5 hours)
  - Go has a very smart package system. Unfortunately, due to the relative
    newness of the language, implementing under the Go "standard" was difficult
    to accomplish. After much googling and reading, I figured out how to order
    my project according to recommended standards. The key was temporarily
    setting `$GOPATH` to include my source directory.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/doc/code.html]()
    - [http://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html]()
    - [http://lmgtfy.com/?q=golang+gopath]()
2. Implement RAM (Time: 7.0 hours)
  - Notes:
    - The implementation of RAM was fairly straight-forward until I got to the
      HalfWords and Words. Testing also posed a bit of a challenge because Go is
      very type safe and intrinsically prevents many standard type-related bugs;
      hence, my test cases can be much shorter and consise.
    - Implementing HalfWords and Words proved difficult. Because the base unit is
      the byte, I needed to split up the words so I could store them
      contiguously as bytes. This required shifts, casting, and additions.
      Eventually, this was implemented with a helper function that worked for
      any number of bytes, a "multi-byte" reader and writer.
    - Implementing the TestFlag, SetFlag, and ExtractBits methods was a very
      good exercise in bitwise operations and pushed me to further learning
      binary mathematics, testing and Go.
    - Some of my time was spent learning Go best practices and testing
      procedures. After implementing RAM, I hope that the learning curve for Go
      will be surmounted.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/testing]()
3. Implement ELF Loader (2.0 hours)
  - Notes:
    - After implementation of well-tested RAM, the loader was rather simple.
      I wrote the acceptance tests and without issue wrote the rest of the
      loader code. The biggest difficulty was fully understanding the ELF
      format and how to properly read binary into Go's provided structs.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/debug/elf]()
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/binary/encoding]()
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/os/]()
    - [http://golang.org/src/pkg/debug/elf/file.go]()
- Notes:
  - (9/7/12) At this checkpoint, I feel like the various code and test suites
    "work". However, the code itself has much maturing to do. This is a result
    of 1) learning a new language as I go and 2) figuring out requirements as I
    go. I don't believe my code is sufficient commented, DRYed, or tested.
    However, due to the checkpoint nature of the project, I plan to improve the
    above mentioned aspects dramatically in the next few weeks.
  - (9/7/12) I have very much enjoyed learning Go. The language is very strict,
    but I've found it easily meldable and usable (a rare combination). The
    built-in libraries are quite suffcient; unfortunately, the number of
    applicable articles and packages are quite limited.

Commit message:

Update journal for refactoring of errors.

journal.markdown, after:

# ARMSIM Project Journal
  by Luke Seelenbinder

## Preparation (Total time: 2 hours)
1. Investigate GO as a possibility for the project. (Time: 2 hours)

## Bootstrapping Code (Total time: 0.75 hours)
1. Implement main() and command line flag parsing. (Time: 0.75 hours)
  - This was easily accomplished via the built in Go tools (see references). I
    spent most of my time learning Go conventions and fighting with the little
    things that vary from language to language.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/log/]()
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/flag/]()

## Loader (Total time: 11.5 hours)
1. Setup package structure (Time: 0.5 hours)
  - Go has a very smart package system. Unfortunately, due to the relative
    newness of the language, implementing under the Go "standard" was difficult
    to accomplish. After much googling and reading, I figured out how to order
    my project according to recommended standards. The key was temporarily
    setting `$GOPATH` to include my source directory.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/doc/code.html]()
    - [http://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html]()
    - [http://lmgtfy.com/?q=golang+gopath]()
2. Implement RAM (Time: 7.0 hours)
  - Notes:
    - The implementation of RAM was fairly straight-forward until I got to the
      HalfWords and Words. Testing also posed a bit of a challenge because Go is
      very type safe and intrinsically prevents many standard type-related bugs;
      hence, my test cases can be much shorter and consise.
    - Implementing HalfWords and Words proved difficult. Because the base unit is
      the byte, I needed to split up the words so I could store them
      contiguously as bytes. This required shifts, casting, and additions.
      Eventually, this was implemented with a helper function that worked for
      any number of bytes, a "multi-byte" reader and writer.
    - Implementing the TestFlag, SetFlag, and ExtractBits methods was a very
      good exercise in bitwise operations and pushed me to further learning
      binary mathematics, testing and Go.
    - Some of my time was spent learning Go best practices and testing
      procedures. After implementing RAM, I hope that the learning curve for Go
      will be surmounted.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/testing]()
3. Implement ELF Loader (2.0 hours)
  - Notes:
    - After implementation of well-tested RAM, the loader was rather simple.
      I wrote the acceptance tests and without issue wrote the rest of the
      loader code. The biggest difficulty was fully understanding the ELF
      format and how to properly read binary into Go's provided structs.
  - References:
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/debug/elf]()
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/binary/encoding]()
    - [http://golang.org/pkg/os/]()
    - [http://golang.org/src/pkg/debug/elf/file.go]()
4. General Refactoring (Time: 2 hours)
  - After a few days and many lines of Go code, I saw a few things that needed
    to be changed, primarily my error handling code. I spent a few hours
    getting this cleaned-up and doing some general refactoring work.
- Notes:
  - (9/7/12) At this checkpoint, I feel like the various code and test suites
    "work". However, the code itself has much maturing to do. This is a result
    of 1) learning a new language as I go and 2) figuring out requirements as I
    go. I don't believe my code is sufficient commented, DRYed, or tested.
    However, due to the checkpoint nature of the project, I plan to improve the
    above mentioned aspects dramatically in the next few weeks.
  - (9/7/12) I have very much enjoyed learning Go. The language is very strict,
    but I've found it easily meldable and usable (a rare combination). The
    built-in libraries are quite suffcient; unfortunately, the number of
    applicable articles and packages are quite limited.
